\newpage
# Basics
Whenever one wishes to talk about sets and functions or spaces and maps between them, it is useful to do so in the context of categories. A great introduction to category theory — including all notions defined in the following section — can be found in \cite{cats}. A **category** is a collection of objects and a collection of morphisms between those objects, such that every object has an identity morphism and the composition of morphisms is associative. One of the two most enlightening examples of categories is of course the category of sets, denoted $\cat{Set}$ — in which the objects are sets and morphisms are regular functions between sets. A morphism $f$ is **monic** (**epic**) if it can be reduced from the left (right), that is $fg=fh$ ($gf=hf$) implies that $g=h$. Monic morphisms behave like injective functions in the category of sets, while epic morphisms behave like surjective functions. Whenever one considers more than one category, it is useful to introduce the notion of a **functor**, which acts like a function between categories (in fact, under reasonable size assumptions \cite{shulman}, categories and functors form a category of categories), which is required by definition to preserve identity morphisms and to commute with composition.

Another interesting example of a category, which stretches our imagination a little further, is the category $\cat{Rel}$. Here, the objects are still sets, but the morphisms are relations between pairs of sets, not functions. There is, in fact, a context in which it is meaningful to say that the category $\cat{Set}$ is a subcategory of $\cat{Rel}$ \cite{cats} since functions can be understood as a special kind of relations.

## Posets
The other most enlightening example of a category is any poset. Posets will also be vital to our discussion of combinatorial dynamical systems in more than one instance. Given a set $P$, a **partial order** on $P$ is a reflexive, transitive and anti-symmetric relation $\leq$ on $P$. A **partially ordered set** — or poset — is a set equipped with a partial order. For a deeper introduction to posets, see \cite{posets}.

To see that any poset is indeed a category, take the collection of elements to be the objects and the morphisms to be pairs of comparable elements. Every object $p$ will have an identity morphism $(p,p)$, due to reflexivity, and morphism $(p,q)$ and $(q,r)$ can be composed to the morphism $(p,r)$ due to transitivity. Moreover, posets with order-preserving functions form another category, denoted $\cat{Pos}$.

A partial order is **total** if any two elements are comparable. A **chain** is a totally ordered subset of a poset. A subset $S$ of a poset $P$ is **convex** if for any element $q\in P$ and all $p,r\in S$ on has that $p\leq q\leq r$ implies that $r\in S$. A subset $S$ of a poset $P$ is **upper** (**lower**) if for any element $p\in S$ and all $q\in P$ on has that $p\leq q$ ($p\geq q$) implies that $q\in S$.

## Partial and Multivalued Maps
In classical mathematics, one assumes that functions are defined on their entire domain, this however is contrary to how mathematicians used to think historically <!-- REF I read this somewhere, cannot find a reference right now --> and to how maths is taught — up to the level of secondary schools — even today. It will be useful for us to consider partial maps between sets or spaces, that is maps which do not assign a value to every point in the origin space. More formally, given objects $A$ and $B$, a **partial morphism** from $A$ to $B$ is a span $A\xleftarrow{\iota}\dom{f}\xrightarrow{f} B$, such that $\iota$ is monic \cite{partialmaps}. The morphism is denoted as $f\colon A\rightharpoonup B$, while the object $\dom{f}$ is called the **domain** of $f$. Whenever objects $A$ and $B$ have an underlying set — for example when they are sets themselves, or topological spaces — we speak of **partial maps**.

Conversely, a classical function can only assign to every argument a single point in the target space. Especially in dynamics, this assumption is too restrictive. One usually circumvents this problem by defining the codomain of the function as the power set of the actual target space — this however does not play nicely with composition, and in particular with iteration. Thankfully, category theory is here to rescue us. Given objects $A$ and $B$, a **multivalued morphism** from $A$ to $B$ is a span $A\xleftarrow{\pi}\dom{f}\xrightarrow{f} B$, such that $\pi$ is epic. The morphism is denoted as $f\colon A\multimap B$, while the object $\dom{f}$ is called the **domain** of $f$. Similarly, whenever objects $A$ and $B$ have an underlying set, we speak of **multivalued maps**. Whenever we present the formula of a multivalued map, we still write the value as a set, it is to be understood that the function assigns every value in that set to the argument.

## Multivalued Maps and Directed Graphs
In the context of combinatorial dynamical systems, where the multivalued map will go from a space back to itself, it will be useful for us to identify multivalued maps with directed graphs. Recall that a directed graph is a collection of points — called vertices — along with a collection of arrows — called directed edges — between them, which formally are just ordered pairs of vertices \cite{graphs}. We can easily identify points of our space with vertices on the graph and draw an arrow from a vertex $v$ to a vertex $w$ if and only if $v$ gets mapped to $w$ through the multivalued map.

Formally, this identification is more easily seen through relations. Recall that a relation $E$ between sets or spaces (objects, actually) $A$ and $B$ is a subset of their product $A\times B$, that is a monic morphism $E\colon\dom{E}\rightarrow A\times B$ \cite{settheory}. In this context, it is reasonable to assume that in the definition of a multivalued map the induced function $\dom{f}\rightarrow A\times B$ is monic. Hence, multivalued maps can be identified with entire relations. A relation between an object $X$ and itself is usually called a binary relation on $X$. A binary relation $E$ on a set $X$ is exactly a directed graph with vertex set $X$ and edge set $E$. Henceforth, the concepts of multivalued maps and directed graphs will be used interchangeably.
