# Combinatorial Dynamical Systems
Having familiarised ourselves with the necessary topology, let us move on to dynamics. All notions in this chapter are defined in \cite{lipinski}, though sometimes we choose an equivalent condition as a definition, for clarity of presentation. We consider a finite topological space and a multivalued map from this space to itself, iterating this map over and over again will give us the dynamical system. This map can be thought of as a step forward in time, pushing all points along their predestined paths. Formally, a **combinatorial dynamical system** is a finite topoligcal space $X$ along with a multivalued map $\CDS\colon X\multimap X$.

### Solutions
Given a combinatorial dynamical system $\CDS\colon X\multimap X$ and a subset $A\subseteq X$, a **solution** of $\CDS$ in $A$ is a partial map $\varphi\colon\mathbb{Z}\rightharpoonup A$, such that $\dom{\varphi}$ is a convex (with respect to the natural order) subset of $\mathbb{Z}$ and for any $j,j+1\in\dom{\varphi}$ one has $\varphi(j+1)\in\CDS(\varphi(j))$. Intuitively, a solution is any walk one can take on the graph associated to the multivalued map.

A solution $\varphi$ is **full** if $\dom{\varphi}=\mathbb{Z}$. A solution $\varphi$ is **partial** if $\dom{\varphi}$ has both a minimal and a maximal element, or equivalently is finite. Of course, there exist solutions which are neither full, nor partial — those are usually called backwars or forwards infinte.

## Combinatorial Multivector Fields
Historically, the first dynamical systems came from systems of differential equations, which produced vector fields. Such dynamical systems which have an origin in some vector field are still an important field of study. Similarily, we will define a combinatorial analouge to a vector field, which will give rise to a combinatorial dynamical system — though the analogy may be difficult to see at first.

Given a finite topological space $(X,\tau)$, a **combinatorial multivector** in $X$ is a locally closed and nonempty subset of $X$. Then, a **combinatorial multivector field** on $X$ is a partition $\CMvF$ of $X$ into combinatorial multivectors. For each $x\in X$ one denotes by $[x]_{\CMvF}$ the unique multivector which contains $x$.

One can associate with every combinatorial multivector field $\CMvF$ a combinatorial dynamical system on $X$ generated by the map $\CDS_{\CMvF}\colon X\ni x\mapsto [x]_{\CMvF}\cup\mathrm{cl}\.x\in X$. The intuition behind multivectors is that the dynamics inside every multivector is unknowable, but the flow always travels towards the mouth. Thus, where two mutlivectors meet, the flow goes from one to another, but not the other way around, at least not immediately.

### Essential Solutions
One of the first applications of topology to qualitative analysis of dynamical systems was due to Tadeusz Ważewski \cite{wazewski}, who developed a retract method, which was later generalised to the Conley index \cite{conley}. In general, his theorem says that given a region in the phase space of a dynamical system, if the region cannot be continuously retraced onto its exit set — which is analogous to the mouth in the combinatorial setting — then a full solution must stay inside this region forever \cite{srzednicki}.

We would like to capture this behaviour, yet due to the tightness of finite topological spaces, every constant map $\mathbb{Z}\rightarrow X$ is a solution. Hence, we distinguish a class of solutions, called *essential*, which are allowed to stay in a given region forever only if a combinatorial analouge to its Conley index is nonzero.

A combinatorial multivector $V$ is **critical** if the relative homology $H(\cls{V},\mth{V})$ is non zero, otherwise it is **regular**. One says that $x\in X$ is **regular** (**critial**) with respect to $\CMvF$ if $[x]_{\CMvF}$ is regular (critial).

A full solution $\varphi$ is **essential** if for every regular $x\in\img{\varphi}$ the set $\{t\in\mathbb{Z}\mid\varphi(t)\notin[x]_{\CMvF}\}$ has neither a minimal nor a maximal element. One denotes the set of all essential solutions in $A$ by $\eSol{A}$ and the set of all essential solutions in $A$ passign through a point $x$ by $\mathrm{eSol}_{\CMvF}(x,A)\dfeq\{\varphi\in\eSol{A}\mid\varphi(0)=x\}$. Given a regular point, if an essential solution passes through it, it must leave the corresponding multivector — if it does so it can come back later, but then it must leave again — it can not stay inside forever.

### Isolated Invariant Sets
A set $A$ is said to be **invariant** if for any $x\in A$ one has $\mathrm{eSol}(x,A)\neq\varnothing$. A closed set $N$ is said to **isolate** an invariant set $S\subseteq N$ if every partial solution in $N$ with endpoints in $S$ is a partial solution in $S$ and $\CDS_{\CMvF}(S)\subseteq N$. An invariant set is **isolated** if there exists a closed set that isolates it.

### Alpha and Omega Limit Sets
Let $\varphi$ be an essential solution. An isolated invariant set $S$ is said to **absorb** $\varphi$ **in positive (negative) time** if there exists $t_0\in\mathbb{Z}$ such that for any $t\geq t_0$ ($t\leq t_0$) one has $\varphi(t)\in S$. The **alpha limit set** (denoted $\alpha(\varphi)$) of $\varphi$ is the intersection of all isolated invariant sets that absorb $\varphi$ in negative time. The **omega limit set** (denoted $\omega(\varphi)$) of $\varphi$ is the intersection of all isolated invariant sets that absorb $\varphi$ in positive time. The alfa and omega limit sets represent the ultimate past and future of a given solution.

## Morse Decomposition
Given a dynamical system, we attempt to decompose it into a collection of isolated invariant sets — which we will call Morse sets — along with gradient alike connections between them. This decomposition allows us to assert certain qualities of the dynamical system, such as the existence of attractors or repellers, as well as to compare dynamical systems.

Let $\CMvF$ be a combinatorial multivector field on a finite topological space $X$, such that $X$ is invariant. A **Morse decomposition** of $X$ is a collection of pairwise disjoint, isolated invarian subsets $\mathcal{M}=\{M_p\subseteq X\mid p\in P\}$ indexed by a poset $P$, such that for every essential solution $\varphi$ in $X$ either there exists an $r\in P$, such that $\img{\varphi}\subseteq M_r$; or there exist $p,q\in P$, such that $p < q$ and $\alpha(\varphi)\subseteq M_q$ and $\omega(\varphi)\subseteq M_p$. One calls the elements of $\mathcal{M}$ **Morse sets**.

One of the most applicable results of \cite{lipinski} is that a minimal (a most fine) Morse decpomposition can be computed by analysing the dynamical system as a directed graph. It should, however, be stressed, that the problem cannot be reduced entirely to graph theory. The fact that the vertices of this graph form a finite topologcal space is vital to the correctness of the theory.

A **path** in a directed graph $G=(X,E)$ is a sequence $x_0,...,x_k$ of vertices, such that for any $j$ in $1,..,k$ the relation $(x_{j-1},x_j)\in E$ holds. A path is **closed** if $x_0=x_k$. A graph $G$ is **recurrent** if every vertex belongs to a closed path. We say that two vertices in a reccurent graph are equivalent if there exist paths from the one to the other and back. It is clear that this equivalence is indeed an equivalence relation. We call the equvalence classes of this relation the **strongly connected components** of the graph $G$ \cite{graphs}. Intuitively, a strongly connected component of a graph is a collection of vertices, such that one can travel from any vertex in this component to any other vertex in the same component, by following the arrows. A **strongly connected component** of a combinatorial dynamical system $\CDS$ is a strongly connected component of its generator, when undersood as a directed graph.

\begin{theorem}
\label{morse-graph}
Let $\CMvF$ be a combinatorial multivector field on a finite topological space $X$, such that $X$ is invariant. The family of all strongly connected components $M$ of $\CDS_{\CMvF}$, such that $\eSol{M}\neq\varnothing$ is a minimal Morse decomposition of $X$ \cite{lipinski}.
\end{theorem}
