\newpage
# Persistence and Conley-Morse Graphs
Homology was first developed as a tool to distinguish topological spaces — it does so by counting holes of different dimensions. The usual example/joke is that to a topologist a doughnut and a mug are the same since they both have one hole. However, in certain situations, one would like to care not only about the presence or lack of holes but also about their size or significance. One such situation is data analysis, in the presence of noise small cycles can appear or disappear and distort homology. One of the tools developed to deal with the significance of homological features is persistence.

Notice, that the maps $H_k\colon X\mapsto H_k(X, R)$, which assign to a topological space $X$ its $k^{\text{th}}$-homology module (be it singular or simplicial, or any other well-defined homology) over a given ring $R$ is a functor from the cathegory $\cat{Top}$ of topological spaces to the cateogry $\cat{RMod}$ of $R$-modules. In particular, given a pair of topological spaces $X$ and $Y$ and a continuous function $f\colon X\rightarrow Y$, we obtain $R$-linear functions $H_k(f)\colon H_k(X, R)\rightarrow H_k(Y, R)$ between homology modules.

Given a sequence of topological spaces $(X_j)_{j\in\mathbb{Z}}$, along with continuous maps $f_j\colon X_j\rightarrow X_{j+1}$, one can examine the induced maps $H_k(f_j)$ in homology. Whenever the sequence of topological spaces is constructed reasonably, tracking the generators of homology modules of a given dimension can reveal information about the significance of any given generator. In particular, generators that appear at a given index and disappear a few indices later are less significant than generators which *persist* over many indices.

Such techniques are widely used in topological data analysis, see for example an introduction in \cite{carlsson} or \cite{ghrist}. The sequence of spaces is usually constructed by varying some parameter, be it distance in point clouds or time in time-series data. More recently, persistence has been used to study changes in the Conley index \cite{pers-index} as well in Morse decompositions \cite{pers-morse}. However, considering the information given only by the Conley index or only by the Morse decomposition may be insufficient.

Given a locally closed subset $A$ of a topological space $X$, we define its **Poincaré polynomial** $p_A$ as $$p_A(t)\dfeq\sum\limits_{k\in\mathbb{N}}\dmn{H_k(\cls{A},\mth{A})}t^k.$$ Given a Morse decomposition $\mathcal{M}=\{M_p\mid p\in P\}$ we consider its **Conley-Morse graph**, which has as vertices the Morse sets of $\mathcal{M}$ and as edges the connections between the Morse sets. Additionally, every vertex of the Conley-Morse graph is labelled with its Poincaré polynomial. Such a construction captures both the connections in the Morse decomposition along with the Conley indices of each Morse set. The persistence of the Conley-Morse graph is studied in \cite{pers-graph}.
