\newpage
# Finite Topological Spaces
Recall that given a set $X$, a **topology** on $X$ is a family $\tau$ of subsets of $X$, which is closed under finite intersections and arbitrary unions. Most textbook definitions additionally require that both the empty set and $X$ are in $\tau$ \cite{engelking}. Some textbooks only require the latter since the empty set is the union of an empty family and all unions are in $\tau$. Since our background is category-theoretic, it is safe to say that $X$ is the intersection of an empty family and since finite intersections must be in $\tau$, so must $X$.

The smallest possible topology on any set $X$ is the pair $\{\varnothing, X\}$, called the **trivial** or **codiscrete topology**, while the largest is the family of all subsets of $X$, called the **discrete topology**. The elements of $\tau$ are called **open sets**, while their complements are **closed sets**. A **topological space** is a set equipped with a topology. Given two topological spaces $X$ and $Y$, a function $f\colon X\rightarrow Y$ is **continuous** if for any open $v\subseteq Y$ the preimage $f^{-1}(v)\subseteq X$ is open. Of course, topological spaces along with continuous functions form a category, denoted $\cat{Top}$. 

Given a subset $A$ of a topological space $X$, we denote its **closure** — that is the smallest closed set that contains it — as $\cls{A}$. We define the **mouth** of $A$ as the set $\mth{A}\dfeq\cls{A}\setminus A$. A subset $A$ is **locally closed** if its mouth is closed. The mouth will be very useful when we introduce dynamics, as it will be the part of the boundary, through which flow can exit the set in question.

A surprising feature of finite topological spaces — especially to those with intuitions about smooth spaces — is that they are very tight. In classical topology we introduce measures of separation to intuit how close must the points be clumped together in a given space, see \cite{engelking} for a clear introduction. Often classical spaces which are not Hausdorff are considered pathological or uninteresting. However, we will see that in the context of finite spaces, being Hausdorff is already a step too far.

A topology $\tau$ is $T_0$ or **Kolmogorow** if for any two different points $x,y\in X$ there exists an open set $u$, such that the intersection $\{x,y\}\cap u$ is a singleton. A topology $\tau$ is $T_1$ or **Frechet** if every singleton is closed. Of course, a Haudorff space is also Frechet. Notice that a finite topological space that is Frechet is necessarily discrete, since every point is closed and the space is finite, the complement of every singleton is a finite union of closed sets and therefore a closed set, making every singleton open. Thus, we will focus our attention on Kolmogorov spaces.

## Alexandroff Theorem
The following result by Alexandroff \cite{alex} shows a very strong connection between posets and Kolmogorow topological spaces.

\begin{theorem}[Alexandroff]
\label{alex}
The categories of finite posets $\cat{fPos}$ and finite Kolmogorow topological spaces $\cat{fT_0Top}$ are isomorphic.
\end{theorem}

More explicitly, there exist functors $\mathcal{P}\colon\cat{fT_0Top}\rightarrow\cat{fPos}$ and $\mathcal{T}\colon\cat{fPos}\rightarrow\cat{fT_0Top}$, such that $\mathcal{T}\mathcal{P}=\mathcal{I}_{\cat{fT_0Top}}$ and $\mathcal{P}\mathcal{T}=\mathcal{I}_{\cat{fPos}}$, where $\mathcal{I}_{\cat{C}}$ is the identity functor on the category $\cat{C}$.

Even more explicitely, given a poset $P$, one can construct a Kolmogorov topological space $\mathcal{T}(P)$, whose open sets are exactly the upper sets of the poset; and given a topological space $X$, one can construct a poset $\mathcal{P}(X)$, where the relation $x\leq y$ holds if and only if $x\in\cls{\{y\}}$; and the two constructions are inverses of each other.

It is important to notice that a subset $A$ of a topological space $X$ is locally closed if and only if the subset $\mathcal{P}(A)$ is convex in the poset $\mathcal{P}(X)$ \cite{lipinski}.

## Simplicial Complexes
One of the most important examples of finite topological spaces can be found by studying simplicial complexes, moreover, they will be extremally useful to us later. A **simplicial complex** $K$ is a pair $(X, E)$, where $X$ is a set of **vertices** and $E$ is a set of finite subsets of $X$, such that for any $x\in X$ the relation $\{x\}\in E$ holds and if $t\in E$ and $s\subseteq t$, then $s\in E$ \cite{tammo}. Usually one requires the subsets in $E$ to be nonempty, which leads to the definition of regular homology. By omitting this assumption, when we eventually define homology, it will be the reduced version \cite{hatcher}.

A set $s\in E$ with $q+1$ elements is called a $q$-**simplex** of $K$. Simplices can be visualised geometrically, one might imagine an embedding of the set $X$ into a space of sufficiently high dimension. Then, $0$-simplices are points of the set $X$, $1$-simplices are lines joining pairs of points, $2$-simplices are structures joining triplets of points — triangles, $3$-simplices are tetrahedrons, and so on... and a simplicial complex is a collection of such simplices glued together neatly.

As the reader might expect, simplicial complexes do form a category, werein morphisms are exactly those functions $f$ between simplicial complexes $K=(X,E)$ and $L=(Y,F)$, such that whenever $s\in E$ then $f(s)\in F$.

To see how simplicial complexes are connected to finite topological spaces, notice that the set of simplicies of a simplicial complex $K$ is partially ordered by inclusion — we will denote the resulting poset as $\mathcal{P}(K)$. Therefore, we can associate to every simplicial complex $K$ a finite Kolmogorov topological space given by $\mathcal{T}(\mathcal{P}(K))$.

Moreover, given a poset $P$, notice that the set of all chains of $P$ form a simplicial complex, which we will call the **order complex** of a poset $P$ and denote as $\mathcal{K}(P)$. However, given a simplicial complex $K$, the order complex $\mathcal{K}(\mathcal{P}(K))$ is not equal to the original complex $K$, but rather is its *barycentric subdivision* \cite{tammo}. Given a finite Kolmogorow topological space $X$, we define its associated simplicial complex as the order complex of $\mathcal{P}(X)$ and denote it as $\mathcal{K}(X)$.

## Simplicial Homology
Homology was first developed as a tool to distinguish topological spaces by the number of holes that they might have. At first, it might be difficult to intuit what a hole is, especially in higher dimensions. The intuition behind homology is to think of *cycles* and *boundaries*. A cycle, loosely speaking, is a closed subspace, while a boundary is a cycle that is a topological boundary of another cycle. However, not every cycle must be a boundary of another cycle, those cycles will represent the holes in our space — subspaces that could be there, but are not. There are countless approaches to formally defining homology, for nice spaces most of them are even equivalent, we will focus on simplicial homology — that is homology defined for simplicial complexes.

In order to properly introduce homology, we must first mention modules. A module is a concept that at the same time generalises both vector spaces and groups. Recall that a vector space over a given field is a space in which we can add elements together and multiply them by the elements of a given field, usually called scalars, where some elementary axioms hold. A module is exactly like a vector space, with the exception that the scalars form a ring, not necessarily a field. Every abelian group is a module over the ring of integers, where multiplication by a scalar is understood as iterative addition \cite{rings}.

Given a ring $R$, a free module $C$ over the ring $R$, generated by a set $S$ is the direct sum \begin{equation}C\dfeq\bigoplus\limits_{s\in S}R.\end{equation}

Let us now fix some ring $R$ as the ring of coefficients — usually for computations it will actually be the finite field $\mathbb{Z}_2$, sometimes also the rings $\mathbb{Z}_p$ for $p>2$. Now, given a simplicial complex $K$, we define its **module of **$p$**-chains** $C_p(K)$ as the free module generated by the set of $p$-simplices of $K$ \cite{tammo}. Intuitively, a chain is a collection of simplices, where every simplex is labelled with a coefficient from the field.

A boundary of a $p$-simplex would be the set of its faces of dimension $p-1$, however, when talking about chains, we will need to pay attention to the coefficients at every simplex. An **ordering** of $K=(X,E)$ is a partial order on $X$ which induces a total order on each simplex \cite{tammo}. We write $s=\langle v_0,...,v_p\rangle$ if the vertices of $s$ satisfy $v_0\leq...\leq v_p$ in the given ordering. Having fixed an ordering of $K$, we define boundary operators \begin{equation}\partial_p\colon C_p(K)\ni\langle v_0,...,v_p\rangle\mapsto\sum\limits_{j=0}^{p}(-1)^j\langle v_0,...,\hat{v_j},...,v_p\rangle\in C_{p-1}(K).\end{equation} The symbol $\hat{v_j}$ means that $v_j$ is to be omitted from the string of vertices. This definition is given on the basis of the module, but it can be extended linearly onto the entire space.

We define the **module of **$p$**-cycles** $Z_p(K)$ of the simplicial complex $K$ as the module $Z_p(K)\dfeq\krn{\partial_p}$, and the **module of **$p$**-boundaries** $B_p(K)$ as the module $B_p(K)\dfeq\img{\partial_{p+1}}$. It is straightforward — though tedious — to verify that, for any $p$, the equality $\partial_{p-1}\circ\partial_p=0$ holds. Therefore, the module of $p$-boundaries is a submodule of the module of $p$-cycles. Hence, we define the $p^\text{th}$ **homology module** $H_p(K)$ of the simplicial complex $K$ as the quotient \begin{equation}H_p(K)\dfeq\quot{Z_p(K)}{B_p(K)}.\end{equation}

## Relative Homology
We will often consider the homology of a space relative to some subspace. Intuitively, it is the homology of the original space with all points in the subspace collapsed to a single point. Additionally, a relative cycle is a cycle, whose entire boundary sits in the given subspace. Formally, in the context of simplicial homology, given a subcomplex $L$ of a simplicial complex $K$, we define the **relative chains** as the quotient $C_p(K,L)\dfeq\quot{C_p(K)}{C_p(L)}$. The boundary operators we defined earlier will induce a boundary operator on the relative chains. Repeating the construction of cycles and boundaries, we define the relative homology of the pair $(K,L)$ \cite{tammo}.

## Homology of Finite Topological Spaces
Given a finite Kolmogorow topological space $X$, we define its homology as the simplicial homology of its associated simplicial complex $\mathcal{K}(X)$. A theorem by McCord \cite{mcc} says that this homology is isomorphic to the singular homology of the space $X$, which is another kind of homology defined for all topological spaces. Given a pair of subsets $B\subseteq A\subseteq X$ it can be shown that the homology of the pair $H(A,B)$ is isomorphic to the homology of the pair $H(\mathcal{K}(A),\mathcal{K}(B))$.
